I was in the FBI for 25 years. I have
sat with spies and enemies of this
country and I learned a lot about human
behaviors. Imagine being able to read
other people and circumstances faster.
It gives you a tremendous advantage in
your life. I want to hear everything.
So, one of the first things I teach is
Joe Navaro is a former FBI agent turned
worldrenowned body language expert. He
helps people decode body language to
improve communication, trust, and
influence. One of the things that I
found in negotiations is we as humans
communicate quite a lot with our faces.
For instance, we push this together when
we don't understand something and then
the minute we hear something we don't
like, blood actually begins to leave the
lips and then we begin to tighten them.
Another behavior is that when there's a
lack of confidence, insecurities, people
immediately. So once we understand these
behaviors, you can take command of any
situation. Confidence. Is this something
that you're born with or do you think
confidence can be trained? It can
absolutely be trained. So the FBI
actually teach confidence and there's a
lot of strategies. One of them is the
most powerful gesture that we can use
and you see Musk do this a lot. But what
I tell people is that the easiest way to
learn confidence is to Joe. We actually
videoed my interaction with you when I
met you. And I've got the video here.
So, one of the things you immediately
did was, "Don't do that. It's a no." No.
This has always blown my mind a little
bit. 53% of you that listen to the show
regularly haven't yet subscribe to the
show. So, could I ask you for a favor
before we start? If you like the show
and you like what we do here and you
want to support us, the free simple way
that you can do just that is by hitting
the subscribe button. And my commitment
to you is if you do that, then I'll do
everything in my power, me and my team,
to make sure that this show is better
for you every single week. We'll listen
to your feedback. We'll find the guest
that you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do. Thank you so
much. Joe, zooming out. If someone asked
you in the street and they wanted a two
sentence answer, who are you and what
have you spent your life doing? How
would you answer that question?
With one word, teaching.
I think I've spent my whole life
teaching. Even even when I was in the
FBI,
uh, starting in
1984, a lot of my job was obviously
being an FBI agent, investigating
crimes, uh, chasing after spies and so
forth. But, uh, you know, I hired on in
1978, but as early as 84, I was already
teaching. And um I love it when when
people get it and they they see a
behavior, they understand the uh
underpinnings, the foundation of why we
do certain things. I'll give you an
example. Sometimes you'll come to a
horrible uh scene and uh people
immediately gasp. They take in air and
then they cover their their their mouths
or there's one point uh difference on
the scoreboard and people are like this
and they don't understand. This is this
is back where we were surrounded by
lions and tigers and we learned to cover
our mouths so as not to broadcast our
breath so that they couldn't see where
we were or find us. And uh and so the
human body has uh a few shortcuts. I
should say the human brain, they're
called huristics. And so one of them is
to freeze. Uh so when we hear a loud
sound or we see a predator or a dog, we
we we freeze. Obviously, whoever ran
300,000 years ago uh was bitten.
Um, and so we have these shortcuts and
uh, and it's always fascinating to me to
share why we have these behaviors and
why we and you realize he just inhaled
so you can hold your breath and then we
cover our breath so we don't broadcast
for the the predators to to smell us.
You spend your time writing books. You
spend your time teaching in various
different contexts these days, whether
it's on stage or in other environments
on the internet.
What is it that
you're giving people?
That's a profound question that I don't
think I've been
asked. I think the simplest answer is
knowledge. Knowledge that perhaps they
didn't have time to acquire. I
uh I grew up very poor. I was a refugee
from Cuba and um and I lived in an area
of Miami which was mostly elderly
people. So I was by myself a lot. So I
would go through uh garbage bins
collecting things uh to read. It's that
knowledge uh that that I was fortunate
enough to acquire the love of uh of
reading. And uh I run into a lot of
people who haven't had that benefit.
Maybe they don't have a love of of
reading and of learning. I see myself as
okay. I have this knowledge. I I I have
sat with terrorists, spies, bazooka
yielding enemies of this
country. And other people never had that
opportunity. And I learned a lot uh from
that and from my reading. So why not
share it? Make their life uh a little
easier. When you say make their life a
little easier, if I am to receive your
knowledge, how would my life be better?
How would I be more
productive? That's a great question.
Imagine being able to app perceive
uh things way ahead of time because you
can read other people and circumstances
faster. Most people see a behavior and
they have to sit there and wonder, are
they upset with me? Are they, as the
Brits would say, my wife is a a Brit.
Are they taking the piss or something?
Just uh any number of of things. But
imagine being able to look at something
and decipher it infinitely faster so
that you can devote yourself to to other
things where most of us break down the
the face into the forehead, the eyes,
the ears, and so forth. And uh but
imagine being able to assess the whole
face, the shoulders, the hands,
everything all at
once and draw inferences from that
information. It gives you a a a
tremendous advantage. And also in
negotiations being able to read others
and uh at the same time we forget that
others are reading us and what is the
perception that we want to uh convey.
And if I were to attain all of the
knowledge that you have to offer and I
were to implement it, what areas of my
life do you believe would
improve? First within yourself, uh, for
instance, being able to assess yourself.
So, if if if let's say you you have
anger issues and and so forth or you
you're quick to trigger, well, h how do
I deal with that? Well, first you
assess, you know, uh, what is going on?
Your stomach gets upset, chest tightens,
your emotions, uh, get up. So, what do I
do then? Most people aren't taught that.
So, there's part of that. There's how to
communicate for instance uh, more
effectively with your children. The
simple thing that for instance uh and
nobody teaches this uh well I do is uh
that you know if you stand in front of
your child like a drill instructor with
your neck stiff you're going to get a
very different reaction than if you
stand at an angle slightly further away
from the child and tilt your head that
the communication you will experience
with that child is so much different
just by tilting your head than if you
are standing directly in front of them
that you can enhance communication. And
then you say, well, what application is
that for real life? Well, you can
actually change the amount of facetime
you get from somebody else. Let's say
you only had two minutes and you want to
stretch that by just tilting your head.
We've demonstrabably shown that you can
change the amount of facetime that
somebody's willing to give to you just
because we show that we're relaxed and
that we're not coming at you with an
agenda that we're willing to um to to
listen. It can be
transformative if you apply that
knowledge. Now some people look at
knowledge and they don't do much with it
but you can you can use it at home you
can use it at work you can use it in in
negotiations for instance one of the
things that I teach is is the the value
of time and time is actually can be used
as a nonverbal. So when I talk about
nonverbals I'm really talking about
anything that communicates but is not a
word. Well, you can use time as a
nonverbal to say I'm in charge. Whoever
dominates and controls time
controls. And so even if I change the
delivery of my message to slow things
down, you're already taking charge in
that
negotiation. It's a beautiful thing to
to to witness when you execute it
properly. So there are a lot of
applications
um and you know and obviously like like
you you you basically study human
behavior you are a business person but
you're actually really in in the people
business and once we understand the the
the needs and some are biological the
wants the
desires the preferences
uh the preferences of others how do they
like that information delivered? How do
they like their coffee? All of that. But
then what do they
fear? Most people don't tell you I have
fears. They say, well, you know, I'm
concerned about that or that I don't
know if that's a good investment or uh
we'll have to do some due dil. That's
the the brain only recognizes fear. And
so once you understand that, it gives
you such
amplitude to uh to then uh pursue
whatever it is that you're interested in
in doing more effectively. And your
career. Yeah. So you've been an you were
an FBI agent for more than 30 years.
Well, I was in law enforcement for 30
years. I was in the FBI uh for 25 years
principally working in the area of
counter intelligence but you know in the
FBI you never wear one hat. Um I was
also a pilot so I flew surveillance. I
was a SWAT team commander so I uh did
SWAT stuff and actually worked with the
SAS from uh from London. And then I was
in the um behavioral analysis program.
So we use uh that skill set to
uh to work on uh catching spies. What is
the behavioral analysis program? In the
uh 8990, the FBI developed a very secret
program to analyze not uh people that
were dead, but actually how do we use
human behavior to catch spies, to catch
terrorists, and then once we catch them,
how do we get into their heads? How do
we get them to tell us what what they're
up to, what their purpose is, and and uh
and so forth? So we created this uh this
program
uh I along with five other agents out of
12,000 were selected from the
FBI to u to become the uh part of this
new behavioral analysis program which
was supposed to be classified except it
it was accidentally leaked and our job
was to look at the threats national
security threats and then see how we can
um use our knowledge of human behavior
to then attack that. So when you say
your much of your work was to catch
spies, right? Most of us have only ever
heard of spies from watching James Bond
and other things like that. So we don't
actually understand the sort of reality
of spies. So if I just play completely
dumb for a second, other countries send
people into other countries like the
United States or the UK or Australia,
Canada, right? To do what? So every
nation state has uh has interests. A lot
of it is obtained through diplomacy. A
lot of it is now uh obtained through
what we called espionage. So uh it's
nothing like television in the movies.
Uh some nations, especially hostile
nations, send what we call hostile
intelligence officers, usually
masquerading as a diplomat, but often
masquerading as students or scientists
or
businessmen. And their job is to acquire
knowledge in in specific areas, military
knowledge, science and
research, intentions and plans, military
intentions and plans. or they may have
interest in for instance what is going
to be the wheat production in Argentina
this year because it may affect the
price of grain across the world. So
there's commercial espionage that uh
that that goes on and so and every
nation uh defends itself by trying to
identify well who is here uh trying to
spy. So that's what we do. That's that
is that's counter intelligence. That's
uh espionage. And it's nothing like the
movies. We don't we don't we don't jump
from buildings. And although we do that
sometimes, but uh it's it's not as uh as
glamorous as as the James Bond stuff.
So, have you caught spies before? I
have. I've arrested spies. Multiple
spies. Yeah. Give me the the most
interesting example of a spy that you
identified in court and what were they
here doing and which country did they
come from? Well, as it turns out, it was
an American because we also have what we
call turncoats.
So in the case of Rodrik James Ramsay,
he was in the an individual who in 1989
I was asked to go interview because we
thought he was a witness um to something
that had happened in Germany. He had a
former army sergeant had been kicked out
of the army. The military wanted to find
out if he knew anything about some
missing documents, if he had seen
anything. During my interview of him,
which again, I thought he was a witness.
He was smoking a cigarette at his house.
And uh I I just mentioned uh an
individual's name that had been at that
base, but who had been under
investigation by German authorities. uh
in fact by the uh Bundas Criminal which
is the equivalent of the
FBI. There's no reason why he should
react to that. It's just a name. But
when I mentioned the name, his cigarette
shook. And um and I knew enough about
human behaviors to know that that
physiological change had to be caused by
something significant. Why would a name
affect him? And uh and so scientific
method talked to him for 20 more minutes
about something else and then I
mentioned that name again and sure
enough his cigarette shook again. And at
that point I was convinced that there
was something nefarious there. As it
turns out the Germans arrested Conrad
Conrad was there Clyde Conrad. That was
the name of the the person that had been
under suspicion.
our our guy that I was interviewing, Rod
Ramsay, was uh was not. And so I left
that interview and then um I persuaded
my supervisors to continue to talk to
Rod Ramsey and that led to a 10-year
investigation and the arrest of uh
three, four, five, six, seven additional
individuals. So that Rodri Ramsey guy
with the shaking cigarette was a he was
spying on America. what that he was
doing. And that's a good question and
forgive me for not explaining. While he
was in the army, he and Clyde Lee Conrad
were they were stealing military secrets
from from the US Army. They they were
taking US Army secrets and then selling
it to the Soviet Union through the
Hungarian intelligence service. So he
was a traitor of the United States. So
he was a traitor and that is often the
biggest problem for any nation state is
the traitors from uh from from within
and they had elevated espionage to an
industrial level. I mean to to the point
where they actually no longer even use
35mm cameras to photograph the
documents. They were actually
videotaping them so that they could
expedite the thousands of pages. It was
the most
damaging espionage case in the history
of the United
States
because they had compromised the United
States nuclear gods in
Germany and that left all of Western
Europe exposed.
Nuclear GO codes. Yes. What is that?
All of our
nuclear assets around the world are
controlled by two
things. There is a uh what's called a
permissive action link which is like a
lastm minute
safety lock on each
device. And then there is the uh go code
that says there is authority to use this
weapon. Ramsay was able to steal the
actual nuclear goat. It's a it's a card.
It's made out of a special material
which I cannot describe. It's made out
of
special metals and plastics and other
things. And um the inherent danger in
what they did was that not that they
could initiate a launch that can only be
initiated at the national command
authority level but if this were
compromised and given to let's say the
Russians at the time the Soviet Union
this is before
1989 then a foreign a foreign hostile
intelligence service could take that and
replicate
it but put the wrong numbers in
there. And by putting the wrong numbers
in there, if it's in a uh in if it's in
a pyramid structure and it's put high
enough, right? Let's let's say you
controlled the all of the East Coast.
Maybe you don't want to spy for for
Russia, but for
$100,000, let's say you were willing to
slip this in there and take the one
that's there out.
Okay. So maybe that helps your
conscience in some way, then you
basically if it's a pyramid uh sort of
uh schema, you can paralyze everything
below that. Okay? So someone could have
changed the codes, put a fake one in,
which meant that it wouldn't work
anymore. that at the highest level then
nothing would work if you if you had it
access at the highest uh level. Did they
go to jail? Oh yes. Yeah. The shaking
cigarette guy went to jail 33
years. Let me just finish it by saying
this. This was this case put of all of
Western Europe in danger as well as the
United States. The general who testified
in this case said that had hostilities
broken out, the defeat of the west would
have been assured within three days.
That's how devastating this
was. Yeah, let that sink in. Those are
his words. The defeat of the West would
have been
assured because of the damage these
individuals had done.
Not all cases are as significant in
terms of catching spies. I was reading
about another one where you caught a man
because of the way he held some flowers.
Yeah. The uh you know, a lot of times
it's it's just based on uh on on the
behavior. You know, you you see how uh
how often somebody looks at their watch,
right? But maybe when they're
operational, they look at their watch
more often. And uh they filmed this guy
who we thought was uh what we call an
illegal. And in in the parliament of
espionage, an illegal is someone who
magically appears in the United States
and pretends to be an American, has
always been an American, like the
series, The Americans. But we had some
clues from one of our sister services
from another country and said we think
this individual may be uh someone who
you need to look at that is uh
pretending to be an American. We're
looking at the the the unit we bring the
the whole team together all six of us
and we're looking at the at the movie
and um you know and it was filmed uh
just serendipitously. It was filmed on
Valentine's Day and uh so we see him
entering a flower shop and leaving the
flower shop when he exited. I said um
definitely he's not an
American. You know, everybody looked at
me
like, "Excuse me?" I said, "He he's not
from
here." And um he said, "How?" And he
says, "Look how he's carrying the the
bouquet. Americans carry the bouquet
bouquet up. Eastern Europeans carry it
bouquet
down and uh and continued to carry it
that way. So I I did what's called a
presumptive. So we stopped him one day
and and I said, you know, I'm with the
FBI and
um and I said, "Do you want to know how
we know?"
And that was the the the first trigger I
was looking for to see how he reacts to
it. And he fell for
it. And he said, "Go on." Most people
would say, "Get out of here. Go
away." And uh and I said, "It was how
you carried the
flowers." His chin came down. His
eyelids went heavy. as he was
evaluating everything he had done, you
know, they he had practiced everything.
His his English was immaculate. You
know, he sounded like a Midwesterner and
all
that. After a few hours of having a nice
really a nice chat, he agreed to work
with us and admitted everything. What
did he admit? That he had been sent here
by a foreign government. that his job as
a as an illegal was to be in the United
States uh act as an American. And most
people don't understand, well, why would
a country, a nation states spend so much
money training these people to be like
an American? And what they don't
understand is their purpose here is for
when hostilities break out. They can
report on for instance uh train traffic,
what trains are carrying munitions, what
airports are being used for what
purposes. Um many times, as he later
told us, they're given caches of
explosives so that they can then blow up
certain things that no missile would be
able to uh uh to do. So, uh, that's
their role in in in hiding in America.
It's not to commit espionage. It's to be
here in, uh, in case hostilities break
out. So, you flipped him to working with
the FBI. Correct. And does that mean he
doesn't get punished?
Well, he doesn't get punished because he
didn't commit any crime other than
immigration uh uh violation, but what he
was able to reveal to us was nothing
short of breathtaking.
Which nation was this? I cannot say.
But obviously, they would have to have
enough money and enough interest to uh
carry out an operation like this. If you
had to hazard a guess how many people
that live amongst us have been sent from
a foreign nation and are
spies, how many do you think it is?
Well, let's let's define that. you know,
I if if they're if they're hostile
intelligence officers,
um it can be anywhere from uh 3% of the
diplomatic staff to as many as at one
time the Soviet Union
85% of their staff were uh were
conducting
espionage. Um I think numbers So you
have those. Now, if you're referring to
like how many illegals, I would say at
least you would have at least two two
dozen in the UK, uh maybe a dozen in
France,
and you know, you would have a whole
host, a constellation of them in the
United States be simply because we span
five time zones. I believe the UK only
spans one. I think I asked this in part
because I was I was reading something
that said much of the the um illegal
immigrants that had come across the
southern border of the United States,
many of them were were Chinese. And
there was an article about questioning
whether that was potentially an an
intentional act to get illegal Chinese
um people into the United States for
some future purpose. Yeah. You know, big
claims require big evidence, and I
haven't seen that. In my experience, the
Chinese Intelligence Service uh prefers
to use students and scientists. We have
approximately 80,000 Chinese students
here at any one time. Um I know that for
instance in
the early 80s and early
90s, they would be given allowances. It
always impressed me that they were given
small allowances for meals but large
allowances for uh photocopying in the
library. U we call that a clue in the
FBI. So they'd be given like $150 for
for eating, but they would be given
thousands of dollars so that they could
copy as much as they could from uh from
the libraries.
It is much easier for them for any
nation to send people here students and
for instance go into engineering or
uh any of those things. On this um
subject of body
language, it's it's highly contested
because some people say body language
does give us clues, some people say it
doesn't give us clues because there's
cultural
differences. Is body language important?
Well, let me address what you just
asked. Well, number one, body language
is is is supremely important because we
we are born without the capacity to talk
and so we have to read the baby in front
of us. to argue that body language a
doesn't matter or it's subject to
interpretation. I would argue that uh
that would be a
minuscule sentiment around the world
amongst people who really have studied
this and I'll and I'll say why. So a
baby is born without the capacity to to
speak. But the mother quickly learns
through nonverbals whether that child is
calicky, whether or not that child needs
just to be reassured,
uh whether they're cold or hot and so
forth. There's a lot of junk out there.
And um that is probably the cleanest
word that I can use about uh body
language that this means that or
whatever. But we're exquisitely prepared
to communicate at any
time whether or not we're comfortable or
uncomfortable, whether we're confident
or uh not understanding. We had to
evolve
that precisely because we were always
surrounded uh by predators. For
instance, Stephen, when you have doubts
or you want followup to questions that I
ask, you use your eyes exquisitly. You
furrow your gloella, one eye rises, the
other one lowers it. You're an easy
read. And so I follow it up with
information. Now, you didn't have to
teach me that. Now, what I would argue
is, am I seeing uh constraint? Am I
seeing um contempt or disdain? Well,
that's a silly argument. We didn't
evolve to have perfect
answers. Evolution is about
approximation for
success. In other words, if I can be
accurate, 75 to 80% of the time, that's
actually good
enough. It's good enough. And so, you
know what I teach is, do you see comfort
or discomfort? psychological, physical
and so forth. Do I see as in psychology
we say um is it positively veanced or
negatively
balanced? Balanced. You see deferrowing
your globella. What what does a veilance
mean? Veilance really means is balanced
or how much electricity goes this way or
this way. Is it what's the veilance of
it? So positively veance. What does that
mean? positively veence. You're going to
see gravitydefying behaviors. You're
going to see emphasis. You're going to
see uh a lot of humor and elacrity and
broad gesture so forth. If it's
negatively balanced, it's, you know,
restraint. You're going to see the uh
the furrowing of the gloella. You're
going to see the tightening dim the
diminition of the the lips. You're going
to see a lot of facial touching. I don't
know right all all these uh
pacifiers and so I would argue that stop
looking for uh perfection in fact Dr.
Ambati at Harvard unfortunately she
passed
away she found that we as humans are
going to be accurate 75% of the time in
our assessment of each other.
That's an extraordinary number. Her
research is is ample. You can look up
her research. It's it's uh it was all
done on the the opaces of looking for
what she called thin slice
assessments. Thin slice assessments. All
of your viewers should know because th
it it it showed us that from as little
as three
milliseconds, we actually get a pretty
good assessment of each other. And we're
right 75% of the time with three
milliseconds. Yes. So they did several
experiments.
They had people go in and watch a
teacher, for instance, by just opening
the door to the classroom, watching her
for a few seconds and closing the door.
They rated that teacher the same as
people who had sat in that classroom all
semester long
in terms of
are they a nice teacher? Are they a warm
teacher? Are they an an empathetic
teacher? Are they a competent teacher?
and so forth. It's as you rub your face
because there's a lot of incredility
there, you have to appreciate this
experiment was done over and over and
over in many areas. I was thinking as
you said it, I was thinking
hell. Like I was thinking um if someone
reads you that quickly, I was thinking
about how easy it is to leave a bad
first impression. Yeah. Well, you know,
when I started in studying body
language, which was formally in
1971, had no appreciation for uh for
school work. So, I created my own uh
study program. So, when I started taking
a look at at body language in
1971, I remember people saying, you
know, the first 20 minutes are the most
important for making an impression. Then
years later was 15 minutes. By the
1980s, somebody had said, "Well, it's
the first four minutes." Well, time
out. That's ancient information. We now
know that that assessment is made in the
first three milliseconds. That's faster
than your blink rate. And you can begin
to do things uh poorly and
badly and begin to negatively affect
others in that amount of of time because
the subconscious is assessing others uh
more quickly. And by the way, I didn't
mention this. We are even before we're
born, we are assessing the world around
us to the point that for survival
purposes, a baby in udo begins to assess
the world around by the amount of noises
and by the cadence and manner of speech
of the mother. So that when that baby is
born and you can look up the
research, the baby will be born
uh mirroring the native tongue. So that
as researchers found a baby with a
German mother will cry differently. The
lilt l i lt t the lilt of that baby will
be different than a French baby. What
does that tell us? that we are already
programmed to adapt
to that which dominates so that we can
fit better. And this goes right from
from that to business because synchrony
is harmony. The the the faster we can
synchronize, the faster we can
harmonize. And so we are pre-programmed.
So if your viewers are interested in
that, they they can look at the uh the
research that's been done on the uh lilt
of crying babies. How does one
synchronize?
So if synchrony equals harmony, yeah,
i.e. if we synchronize with each other,
then we're going to be harmonious in
business or in life or whatever, right?
How do I synchronize with somebody when
I meet them? The first thing is at a
distance. Um, if I saw you walking down
the hallway and and you say, "Hey, Joe."
You know, and I say, "Steve, how are
you?"
Right? I'm mirroring you. You know, this
goes back to the work of Carl Rogers in
the early
1960s. And he found that
synchrony puts us in sort of locks us in
into this binding, psychological binding
of where you greet with your hand and
arch your eyebrows. Hey, well that sends
powerful messages. So if I do it, can
you imagine if you greeted me like this?
And I went, "Yeah, how you doing?" Yeah.
It's like we're totally out of out of
harmony. We're totally out of synchrony.
So um we begin with uh with the
non-verbals. We begin, for instance,
with the clothing. you know, if you go
to a meeting, you know, we would
probably dress the same way or
approximate e each other. Um, we would
probably have this, look at us right now
with our hand gestures. We're literally
mirroring each other's hand gestures to
to the point where our thumbs are
precisely uh the same way. Why? Because
we're comfortable with each other. We
would lean in if we are um in in in good
synchrony. our speech pattern uh would
would
synchronize and um and to the point
where you can actually work with
individuals to calm them down or to see
things your way or to appreciate let's
say in
negotiations to begin to be more
receptive. People are more receptive if
they can mirror your uh behaviors.
So people are more receptive if they can
mirror your behaviors. So if I let you
mirror my behavior, then you're going to
be more receptive to what I have to say.
Is that what you're saying?
In general, we cannot be mimicking each
other like it's a game.
It becomes
ridiculous. But there's no way we can
negotiate if you're screaming and I'm
stoic. Yeah. it it just it doesn't
happen. For instance, you and I probably
are doing a pretty good job of
just mirroring each other in the in the
in the conversation. We are likely more
likely to be successful, have more
facetime, and achieve more. If we can
talk to each other this way, then if all
of a sudden I decide to sit
sideways, kick my feet up and lean on my
and my and my elbow, that gesture alone,
even though it's a comfort display,
doesn't put us in synchrony. And
everything that I have ever found was
even when I was talking to terrorists,
even when talking to terrorists who
absolutely hated me, hated a lot of
other
things, if I could just get them
grounded to the point where we are
talking basically the same way and using
the same words. If if they say my
family, don't say wife and
kids. Use family. Don't use terms of
art. You know, if they say, "Well,
what's the price?" Don't come back and
say, "Well, the the the the uh the the
points on this are that that's not what
they asked." That's a great way to
demonstrate that you're not um that
you're not uh listening. And and the
other thing I I always emphasize is that
for years people said well try to reduce
everything that's emotional
uh so that it doesn't
interfere. That's not how we evolved.
That is absolutely not how we evolved.
We evolved to deal with emotions because
emotions keep us alive. When our
amygdala uh senses a threat, it is there
to uh deal with that. And anything
negative rises to
prominence. That's one of the first
things I teach. If if it's really
negative, it's it rises to prominence.
We assess for it first. We deal with
that first. And often in business, what
we see is, you know, somebody had a hard
time uh finding your location. They had
a hard time parking. Then they had to go
to your receptionist who was on the
phone and took about 7 minutes to even
say good morning. And when they did,
they did it with no elacrity. Then they
have to go through security. Then they
have to take the elevator that's crowded
and then finally get to your office.
And you want them to jump right into the
meeting without all that ne negativity
that has been
acred. That's not how humans evolved.
That is absolutely not how our species
evolved. Our species evolved to
deconlict that to diminish that by first
dealing with that. That's where
storytelling in part came from where we
came and said you know I chased it I was
able to he attacked me then I attacked
back and you know and then we we go
through that whole storytelling which
has mythical proportions and mythical
aspects as archetypes and if you
subscribe to Yungian
psychology one of the arguments that I
always use is this. How many of you have
been in an argument and then 30 minutes
later you remember all the clever lines
you should have said? We all have. And
that's because the emotional brain
hijacks neural
activity. If you want the best out of
people, if you want the best out of a
relationship, vent that. Get that
out. Give it time. Okay? And yes, you're
going to have to invest that time. and
then move forward so that you can uh uh
deal with the the the the transactional
the business and uh and so forth.
You um you've referenced a few times
different types of body language that
I've exhibited that help you understand
what I'm thinking and going through. Um
I think a second ago you referenced
glabula and this brings me to something
I read in your work about eyebrow
knitting. Yeah. What is eyebrow
knitting?
So this little area uh between your eyes
is called the gloella. And the gloella
is great because at at about well we
I've seen it in babies as early as 3 or
4 days. But uh very early on we begin to
furrow. In other words, we push this
together when we have doubts or we don't
like something or we don't understand
something. So we we furrow the gloella.
Uh some people call it uh eyebrow
knitting because we are uh we have nicer
eyebrows nowadays, not bushy like the
old days. They don't come together like
they used to. Um so we uh a lot of those
expressions of I don't understand we we
use with the squinted eyes
um the the furrowed gloella. You know
sometimes we'll we'll touch our face or
or scratch our face babies at 47 seconds
which I have directly observed uh if you
shine a light at a newborn baby it will
furrow the chin that they don't like it
and uh in my presentations I have a m a
matching one of a 47y old man and a 47
second old baby both doing the same
thing when they hear things they don't
they don't like. So we we begin to
communicate quite a lot uh actually with
with our faces. What about eyelid
touching?
Yeah. So for a long time including in
some of my writing um the theory was a
lot of people cover their eyes, touch
their eyes when they hear bad news. If
you said, "Hey Joe, can you help me move
this weekend?" Oh geez, Steve. uh right
you you see a lot of that and I started
to think about that uh uh about five or
six years ago and so I took some classes
in anatomy human anatomy and I'm I'm
pretty much convinced now that a lot of
the facial touching including the you
know touching of the eyes and so forth
has to do with the intervation of the
fifth cranial nerve and the seventh
cranial nerve. Now, some of your viewers
may find this interesting. That nerve
which goes to our forehead and actually
goes into our eyelids and so forth. And
the seventh which is the
facial is very short in distance to that
part of the brain where it is received.
And so I think and you know I've
postulated I wrote for psychology today
that a lot of the reasons why we touch
our face and why we uh touch our eyes oh
no uh is because that pressure
uh immediately goes to uh the brain and
helps to relieve stress and because the
nerve is so short right we could massage
our feet and achieve the same but it's
very far away. So I think a lot of
facial touching including eye touching
we do because of uh of its ability to
anytime there's stress we pacify
ourselves and and by the way it's very
interesting in
1974 I was uh bored at the university so
there was a lab where you could actually
watch children and study them at play
and they had some children there that
were born blind so they had never seen
and I was just blown away the first time
I I saw a blind child who had never seen
heard some news that was not very good
and immediately covered their eyes
having never seen. And that's when I
realized okay we are 2.4 million years
old. This is uh hardwired in our DNA.
This is part of our paleo circuits as
Dr. David Given later taught me and it
has to do with how it feels and that's
why we touch our faces so much. So, it's
typically a negative emotion and a form
of self soothing for that negative
emotion. I think that's a good synopsis.
But also keep in mind how often we touch
our faces when we're having a nice time.
Like when I'm reading, I find myself
turning pages. Uh because I read very
fast. I turn with my left hand, but I
pacify or soothe myself by touching my
my, you know, it's a pens of uh pose.
Women will play with their hair all day
long. our brain is asking us to do
things to contribute uh to that. But
when there's something stressful then
for instance we go from like in
negotiations when somebody throws a
number we don't like we'll go from
touching our face to scratching our face
because the brain is saying hey do
something more powerful that will keep
me in what we call homeost uh stasis.
So, um, to answer your question, yes,
but it also applies to when we're really
enjoying a moment. What about our lips?
You talked a second ago about like
pursed lips and stuff. What kind of
clues does do the lips give away? Yeah.
So, for me, the lips are the
um the seismograph. The the lips are
like the emotional seismograph of the
body. When we
are comfortable and confident, our lips
are full of blood. their color changes.
The minute we hear something we don't
like, blood actually begins to leave the
lips and they become narrower and then
we begin to tighten them. You know, if
somebody says something I don't like, I
might
go right or we begin to bite the lip
because we're stressed or we pluck it,
pull on it, do all all sorts of of
things to to soothe it. But the lips get
very uh show a a lot of nervous emotion
when we're under stress. So they're
they're very much re as is the jaw. Like
for instance, if you said something I
might not agree with my I probably shift
my jaw because when you shift your jaw,
it puts pressure on the TMJ and that
alone says to the brain go somewhere
else. Don't don't uh you know don't
struggle too much with that. So um we're
always doing something physical to
counter anything that the brain might be
undergoing.
Tell me about the supernal notch. What
the hell? So the supernal notch um it
has other names. You could call it the
little neck dimple. Uh this little area
right at the bottom of your your throat.
It's a a deep uh
indentation. This is the most vulnerable
part of the human body. All air, food,
nutrients, blood,
electricity, oxygen, everything goes
through there. And what happens is, and
one of the things that I found was that
there was nothing in the literature in
197576. I'm looking and I'm noticing
that when people are nervous, they
immediately cover their neck. They touch
their neck. You know, in the literature
you hear about, oh, she um, you know,
clutched her pearls, right? Um, rubbing
that men tend to do it more robustly
because of testosterone. Women tend to
more directly touch the superernal
notch. And what I found is when there's
a lack of confidence, insecurities,
fear, apprehensions, or concerns that
people will go, "Oh my god, did you see
that?" Right? Oh, it's gone. It's back.
And you know, why is it all directed at
this little area of the neck? And why do
men clutch their necks and massage their
necks when they're It's the worst thing
you can do in negotiations, by the way,
is touch your neck. Because what you're
transmitting is weakness. Somebody whose
confidence just never touches the neck.
You just don't you don't go anywhere
near the neck and you don't ventilate
because you're what you're saying is
you're you're getting to me. Ventilating
behaviors. Wait, sorry. When you say
ventilate, you mean giving yourself air?
Yeah. So it could be so to ventilating
behaviors, okay, are behaviors of
weakness because your body temperature
has changed at 1 250th of a second and
what you're revealing is something
negative is getting to you. So you you
you don't do that. But here's the
behavior, the neck touching, neck
covering covering of the supernal notch.
And there's another behavior. You know
earlier we talked about we were
surrounded by predators and one of the
behaviors we did was to cover our mouths
or hold still when we hear a noise. The
third behavior is to cover the neck. To
cover the neck because large felines
always go for the neck. And so the the
brain didn't doesn't have a closet full
of ties.
It has about four
choices. And those four
behaviors are
exquisite. It's proven over time that if
we cover our mouth, cover the neck,
don't
move, they work pretty well. So, we
don't have to choose a lot of colors.
And the other thing sometimes you'll see
people do is when um you see this here
in Florida and we certainly saw it in
November after the hurricane, people
come to see their house and they cover
their their head. Hands are up here. Oh
my god. You know why? Why? Why do we do
that? Again, large felines. These are
shortcuts. This is huristics that have
prevailed and say, "Oh no, right.
And you and and you say, 'Well, we're no
longer surrounded by them. Well, go to
India. There were 238 attacks last
year. It is in our DNA. It is performed
out of necessity to uh to to keep us
alive. So, we have these um these
reactions. But um so, I look at the I
certainly I look at the uh at the lips
and the and the neck as uh as good
places for information. I was just
thinking then about why yeah you hold
your head but you also hold your head
when you see something that's fallen
over. So if like you seen like a
building falling down in an earthquake
you immediately the other day it was an
old car and it was and was parked at an
angle on a road that was at an angle and
they forgot to set the the brake and I'm
watching it slowly slide.
And I found myself I teach this stuff
with my hands up here and uh
unfortunately it was across the street
and I couldn't get to it uh fast enough
and it didn't do any damage. But but you
realize these uh these shortcuts uh are
with us for a purpose. Much of the work
you do as an FBI agent is some form of
negotiation and you spend a lot of time
teaching people how to be good
negotiators as well. You mentioned
negotiation a second ago.
I'm a business person. I do lots of
negotiations, whether it's with clients
or suppliers or interviews. You know,
I'm interviewing people all the time,
which I consider to be a negotiation.
How do I improve my negotiation skills?
What are the things I should be thinking
about as I go into the negotiation?
Well, uh, you know, they warn me. You
ask profound questions.
Um, and you're right in in the FBI. I
mean, when you're trying to convince
someone to tell us the truth and put
themselves in jeopardy, that is nothing
but negotiations. you may look at as
interviewing but like you said even a
conversation you know I look at
negotiations in the same way that I look
at
interviewing it's in in in the simplest
form it's effective communication with a
purpose. So you say well that's highly
simplistic. I've never heard that. Well
think of it. Well what is the purpose?
Okay. Well, we'll get to that in a
minute. Either you have something I need
or want or that, but there has to be
communication and there has to be an
understanding of of what I mean and what
I uh intend and and so forth. So, for
me, it's a reminder when I first came
into the
FBI, an old-timer said to me, "Intering
isn't about the confession." And I
looked at him like, "What? What do you
excuse me? What do you mean not about
the confession? He says you'll get the
confession. Interviewing is about
facetime. If you can get people to talk
to you for two hours, three hours, four
hours, in one case, I I interviewed an
individual for for 12 hours. We, you
know, they'll tell you everything you
need to know, but you got to keep them
in the room. And so I always view
negotiations of number one is how do I
communicate with you in a way that
you'll want to talk to
me for however long it takes to get to
that
purpose which is the transaction. Now,
you know, if if I'm evaluating you to
for your services or if I'm negotiating
for for for prices, you know, I want to
hear what you have to say and I want to
lay out what um I'm interested in
achieving and then reconciling or
working around whatever discrepancies or
issues they there may
be. I think when we look at negotiations
that way, we can say, well, that means I
got to do a lot of stuff up front, which
is who am I communicating with? Who am I
going to negotiate with? What's their
negotiating style? Are they stoic? Do
they come in? Are they do they throw
things down? I mean, I've I've been I've
been in negotiations where opposing
counsel came in and literally walked
into the room, didn't even say good
morning, just threw the things down and
said, "I want to hear the
numbers." Okay, then how do we begin to
deal with that? Because someone that
comes in and is aggressive and so forth,
you've got to deal with. What do you do?
Do you rise to their aggression or do
you try and bring them down to your
position? Great question that the worst
thing you can do is rise rise to that.
You begin to dominate them by taking
control of
time. Whoever controls time
controls. And so they come in, they
throw the things down. So usually, you
know, we'll start with Well, good
morning to you, too. Uh yeah. Yeah.
Let's let's let's cut to the
chase. And then the whole team I'm
working with knows we're going to slow
things down. We are not going to be
working at that pace because if you work
at that pace, they're taking control.
And so we slow things
down. And there's several strategies.
you can become all of a sudden you can
become very visual and say all right
we're going to you know write this down
and we're going to put this here we're
going to put you know and then this is
this is the difference of you know
there's a lot of strategies but the
first thing is you we've got to get that
person to understand that we negotiate
hopefully as
equals but if the perception is always
that that person is negotiating as the
bully or is always in charge, you're
never going to have uh equity. Now, I've
had a lot of clients that that have
said, "Hey, you know, I've tried all
your strategies and you know, this this
guy I'm dealing with is is just he's
crass. He's just a bully. he comes in
and he stuff like and I and so one of
the questions I always ask is is he the
only source? Is is he or she the only
source? Number one. And number two is
how long are you willing to
tolerate this person? Because we failed
to to look at that. He gives you
headaches. You don't sleep well every
time you go to this. I'm thinking of one
client in particular. You come away with
a nervous stomach. He and you know how
long are you willing to tolerate that?
If you're willing to tolerate it, then
you know he's not going to change his
style. Then you come in and we we change
our exposure. So we're not going to
expose all of our staff to that kind of
negativity. Uh we send in our first
person and say, "Look, here are the
numbers." And we work with that. But
there are ways to to to to dealing with
the with the very toxic.
uh but we don't allow them to get away
with everything nor think that uh
they're in charge and we do it in in in
subtle ways and we uh sort of derail
their agenda. Maybe their agenda based
on past meetings was to come in and just
throw these things at us uh very
quickly. Then we have to adjust uh to
that. So there has to be rehearsed
strategies for for dealing with that.
One of the things your work made me
think about is how important it is to
literally like write down the goal of my
negotiation before I go into the
negotiation. Or else you might get swept
up in the emotion of it and the the sort
of heat of the m the moment. Yeah. You
you wouldn't be the first one to find
yourself in a meeting negotiating and
all of a sudden you're you know it's
like what are what are we actually
negotiating for?
And um and so that's why I like the the
simplicity of um effective communication
with a purpose as a form of uh
negotiations but to also understand what
is my role. What is my role and what is
my purpose in being there? Because many
times we go into negotiations and the
chief financial officer is there. Ding.
Uh sometimes we go in there and you know
your first assistant is always uh there
also but you also have uh in office
counsel that is in attendance. What's
their role? And what is my role? You
know something so simple as what are you
going to do? Look straight ahead the
whole time um your c you know your
attorney is speaking or are you going to
look at him? Well, we know from the
research that by looking at uh the
person who's actually talking on your
side actually potentiates the gravity of
what he's saying that uh at the most
emphatic points that when that attorney
makes um and you did this earlier, you
want to steeple because steeple is the
most powerful gesture that we have to
convey confidence. steepling is in this
sort of hand is this is is this former
German chancellor Angela Merkel did this
a lot. You see uh Musk do this a lot.
You see uh Steve Jobs used to a lot of
pictures of Steve Jobs doing that. But
you know you reserve that for that point
in time when you want to
emphasize and so the worst thing you can
do is just to sit there uh dormant. And
in fact, we have research and it's
called the stillface experiments. And
that is that the worst thing you can do
is sit at a meeting and hold a still
face. You're perceived as a threat. You
are perceived as less trustworthy.
You're perceived as
insignificant. Corner of your mouths are
down. I roll to the to the right,
Stephen. That's how you're
perceived. And that's and that's what
happens. uh the experiments which were
done first with babies found that if you
take a baby and it's called the
stillface experiments. If you take a
baby and uh you look away and look back
and uh and smile the baby's content. You
can do that several times but on the
last one you turn around and you hold
very
still. The babies
become incontrollable. They they they
have fits. They're really troubled by
that. So the experimenters said, "Well,
yeah, but at what age does that uh leave
us?" So they decided to do it with
adults. Adults do the same thing. If you
and I are talking and we're exchanging
faces, the worst thing I can do is then
sit there.
It is. You see, you you find it
disconcerting. Yeah. and what the brain
perceives is a
threat and you lose trustworthiness
because you can't read what this
person's thinking either way. I'd rather
you be up unhappy then at least I can
put that in a box. Well, that's one way
to to look at it. I'm not sure that
anybody knows the the precise reason for
it. But what we do understand is that
the still face which if you're in a
virtual call you want to nod you want to
tilt your head you want to make uh
different gestures but the the worst
thing you can do is hold still and then
in negotiations when you're talking to
the team and saying look when we're
going in there you know I don't want
anybody to just sit there I want
expressions uh and I and when someone is
speaking you know you're looking at them
uh in the same way that the other side
would do. But you have to plan. Now, the
other thing I find with negotiators,
uh, one thing I did in the FBI is I
always planned my interviews in
exquisite detail. Who would enter the
room first, who would say what, where I
would sit, who gets offered water, and
when, because I need to be in control.
Who's going to say what?
These are things people don't think
about. But at the levels with the people
that I deal with, you have to have a
certain amount of
advantage. You have to have a certain
amount of psychological leverage to say,
"Look, you may be the world's largest
manufacturer of this, and I'm just
starting out, but I am not down here."
And so I would appreciate if you would
begin to value me and I do that by doing
certain things in the manner that I walk
in. Who walks in first? Where do I
sit? What gestures do I use to point?
Right? So you never use your finger. You
always use the full hand in the vertical
position. You take command of the
situation and it looks aesthetically
pleasing. Oh, isn't it nice? He's
offering me something to drink. Or the
assistant or someone says, "Uh, what
would you would you like some tea? How
would you like it?" And so forth. And
what we're actually witnessing is the
transformation of I you have
now become the dominant person by
becoming the archetypal the father or
mother figure because you're offering
something because you're offering it and
you're in control of of of the food and
and the brain. You know, people often
wondered, well, why, you know, why was
it in Stockholm uh Sweden back in the
70s that the Stockholm syndrome took
hold so fast with those bank robbers
where they had such an effect on their
victims that within hours the the the
victims were defending the the bank
robbers. It was very simple. They became
the father figure and the hostages
became the children. So, I actually
don't know that story. What happened was
there was a bank robbery and in
Stockholm and uh the bank robbers went
in held the the the victims hostage.
Eventually uh they were rescued but what
they found was that in in a matter of
hours the victims were rising to the
defense of the criminals and it became
known as the Stockholm syndrome. And
what it showed us was the robbers became
the archetype of the parent and the
hostages became the children and in an
instant they became uh sub subservient.
Is that what happens in domestic abuse
cases as well? Yes, you nailed it. You
nailed it beautifully. Yeah, you're the
the first person to get that right away.
And and that's why you often see this in
domestic abuse cases and you say, "How
can she just got beat up? How can she
defend him, usually the the case, and
you realize, oh my god, we have a like a
Stockholm syndrome where he's the
provider, he's the only one working or
this or that." But, you know, getting
back to negotiations, I think it's it's
one of those things that I insist that
if you go into negotiations that you be
treated at least as an equal and that
the minute people start to look down on
you, it makes for a very difficult uh
conversation. So, when you're thinking
about walking into the room and all
these where you sit, if you're walking
into the room to interview a terrorist,
right, are you trying to walk into the
room first or are you trying to walk
into the room last? Do you send your
team in to walk in first, then you show
up last? And where what are you thinking
about seating positions? Right. So, one
of the things that I always insisted is
I would walk into the room first.
So, they would already be in there. No,
no, no. I we would we would walk to the
room with them with them and then I
would just make them wait there a
minute. I'd open it. I'd take a look and
I'd say just want to make sure the room
is safe and there's nobody in here. You
know, I've walked into people
before. That begins to establish my
dominance. And then I would say, um, why
don't you take a a seat uh right there?
You know, people ask me, "Well, why, you
know, why are you being so nice to these
uh the these criminals?" Well, first of
all, I go back to what that old-timer
said. I want facetime. I don't care what
it takes to get facetime, but I also
want to be in charge. And if by being
nice to him and pointing to the nice
chair there achieves
that, then uh so much for me. And then I
always try to sit in in a in a way that
uh I sit higher. Now, in the case of
Ramsay, we'd literally get the room
ahead of time and we would change the
the the furniture so that I always set
an about an inch to two inches higher
than he did. He never noticed that.
Ramsey was the the guy whose cigarette
was quivering was quivering. In the end,
we ended up doing uh 37 interviews and
they were all done in hotel rooms mostly
in the Orlando area and we would go in
ahead of time and uh we would just uh
arrange the furniture or bring in
furniture, but I always sat higher than
him. He never understood that. He always
sat on the couch, which um somehow uh
about an about that much was shaved from
the couch. so that it always set um a
little lower. And so um he was always
literally slightly looking up to us and
then we controlled when we would take
breaks and I I you know and I was always
attentive and I would say you know would
you like something to drink now? I said,
"Well, this is such a good subject. Why
don't we take the break now and you you
have the drink now and then we'll so we
can uh continue." What he didn't realize
was that um I was establishing uh
control over him by sort of dictating.
Uh it it's it it would be no, you know,
I'm sure your listeners might be saying,
"Boy, that's manipulative." Yeah, but in
in the transactional phase, it's no
different than you you saying to your
crew, I need to take a break right now
and go to the restroom. Okay, take a
break. I don't I don't think that much
of it. But over time, what happens is he
begins to
relinquish a lot of that
forcefulness that he'd love to exhibit.
He'd love to be in charge, but I'm not
permitting it. And sometimes he he he
would say, "Well, I could use a smoke
break right now." And I'd say, "Hang on
a second because what you just said was
really interesting." And my partner,
Mrs. Terry Moody, I I loved her. She was
a great partner. She'd looked at me
like, "Really? You're going to push it
that much further?"
But it worked uh to the point where um I
mean here's a guy who had his attorney's
phone number on him at all times and he
never used that.
You mentioned the height of the chairs.
What what does height matter in this
context? Because I was thinking as well
about Zoom and the interesting thing
about now about Zoom and we were talking
about this before we started recording
and the fact that most of our
conversations are happen happening
digitally now is we don't often think
about height and I I'm sometimes on a
call uh with one of my colleagues or
partners and I'll often ask them before
the client or whoever we're doing
business with joins the call to adjust
the height because they are like they're
like looking down into the lens or
they're looking up into the lens which I
think is also Suboptimal. Good term,
suboptimum. There's a lot to be said
about height. Just as there is a beauty
dividend, right? So, the beauty
dividend, and you can look this up, the
beauty dividend, well researched,
basically says you're going to earn 8%
per
year the rest of your life just if you
are good-looking. That's the beauty
dividend. You can go online and look at
all the studies and the statistics that
go with it. There's also a height
dividend and it is universal.
If you look at Americans that are 6'2
inches, so a little taller than me,
accounts for about 3% of the
population, unless you go to the Fortune
500 companies and then they account for
39% of all CEOs at
62. Whoa. That my friend is an order
of
increase. And you say, are taller people
smarter? Uh,
no. No. It has to do with the benefit of
of being
tall. There is a dividend. And so we
tend to see that across the world. The
word dividend, for anyone that doesn't
know, basically means a like a benefit
or a reward. One could think of it as an
advantage. You you have an advantage. So
with Ramsay, what was the the dividend
by you making your chair just an inch
taller? What were you doing, Tim? You're
taking away his power a little bit,
making you more powerful. I had to
because he had all the cards. He was the
spy. He had all the
evidence in his head or in his
possession or the Russians had it. The
Russians weren't going to give it to us.
They're the enemy. They said, "Too bad,
mates. We've got all your secrets." They
had so many secrets that they measured
it in weight, not just in pages. The
other problem I was dealing with was is
his
IQ. He had the second highest IQ in the
that the army ever recorded since World
War II. He could talk on any subject,
quantum physics to whatever. when you
have a superior
intellect in his case which was true or
you're dealing with someone let's say
who is malignant narcissist so they
account for about 2% of the population
but about 20% of
CEOs so your m your malignant narcissist
who overvalues
themselves and tends to devalue others
and in my case with him he had
narcissist istic traits which I could I
could deal with but his superior
intellect was breathtaking and he had
perfect recall. Uh so in a way it was
frightening because all he had to do was
transport himself to another country and
he could sell all the secrets that he
had memorized. So I had to play a a
certain role, but I also couldn't let
him take charge of the investigation and
not one that had put England,
Germany, all of Western Europe in
jeopardy as well as Canada and the
United States. I could not afford, the
United States government couldn't afford
to have him uh be flippant with the
knowledge that um that he knew,
especially once we knew that he had
compromised the nuclear go- codes. Do
you mind if I pause this conversation
for a moment? I want to talk about our
show sponsor today, which is Shopify.
I've always believed that the biggest
cost in business isn't failure. It's the
time you waste trying to make decisions.
Time spent hesitating, overthinking, or
waiting for the right moment. When I
started my first company at 20 years
old, I had no experience and no money.
What I did have was an idea and the
willingness to move fast, and that made
all the difference. If you've been
thinking about starting your own
business, Shopify makes this entire
process so much easier. With thousands
of customizable templates, you don't
need coding or design skills. You just
need a willingness to start. Shopify
connects all your sales channels from
your website to social media. and it
handles the back-end payments, shipping,
and taxes, too, so that you can stay
focused on moving forward and growing
your business. If you're ready to start,
visit
shopify.com/bartlet and sign up for a£1
per month trial period. That's
shopify.com/bartlet.
What about posture? Because that's kind
of one way to make yourself taller.
Yeah. Um, are there any clues in
someone's posture? And how important is
sort of playing with our posture to
create a different impression? Yeah,
absolutely. Not just not just posture
but uh territory. So I look at posture
as you know when we when we look
confident shoulders back our breathing
to me posture starts with the brain how
calm we are in our breathing. I was
again in Valencia at this uh this event
and and uh a lady came up to me and she
says, "You're getting ready to go on the
stage. H how can you not be nervous?"
And I said, "Well, I am nervous. I'm
just hiding it. I'm acting like uh I'm
I'm in control." But I've I've learned
to do that because you don't want to
look like a nervous FBI agent. Trust me,
you want to look cool, calm, and
collected in negotiations.
um you don't want to uh look uh needy.
You don't want to
look desperate. Um and at the same
time, you don't want to come across
as you're indifferent. And
sometimes that demeanor, that posture,
those gestures, the the totality of it
has a lot of meaning. Now, you have to
keep in mind a lot of successful
businessmen I'm running into are
actually on the spectrum, right? So, the
autism spectrum and so they don't make
as much eye contact. They may have
behaviors that are irregular. I have one
I deal with who has aspberers and so he
uh sometimes jerks and so there's a lot
of uh discomfort I find from others in
reading him. I don't have any problem. I
just see it. Okay, this is his uh normal
behaviors and we get around. But you can
tell a lot uh about a a a person. When
you've invested in things, you're doing
your diligence and you're talking to
people. Yeah, you can look at the
numbers all day long, but you also are
looking at the non-verbals and saying,
you know, uh are they communicating
confidence or are they communicating uh
desire or need or um or any kind of
frailty? I I was just reflecting on a
few of the interviews I've had recently.
We've been interviewing for one
particular very very senior role. Yeah.
And there were two final stage
candidates and I was just reflecting as
you were saying how one of the final
stage candidates was extremely calm and
sat back in their chair and the other
one was very much leaning forward. And
upon reflection the second candidate
wanted the job a lot more. But the first
candidate was probably more experienced,
more confident and had higher selfworth.
and their ability to be so relaxed in
that environment and kind of own the
chair in in my boardroom was actually it
actually made me kind of want them more
because they were signaling to me that
they had lots of options. They weren't
intimidated. They weren't scared. They
weren't nervous about this opportunity.
You know, that's an interesting
observation, Stephen. And it's and it's
a it's very good that you observe the
the discrepancy. One of the things that
I look for is what is their role going
to be? I I don't mind that somebody is
nervous. Um I myself early on coming
from a humble background was often
nervous. I tend to focus on the things
that most
organizations don't put into their plan
to look for.
One of them is problem
solving. Give me a list of the problems
you have
solved. Most qu most people when they
hire they never ask that question. They
tell you know I can do Excel. I I know
Microsoft I that's great. Please tell me
what problems you have
solved at at at your last uh
job and and you know how efficiently did
you do it? How do you know if they
solved the problem or they were on a
team where someone else solved the
problem? Because one of the things that
I said, you know, look for is is how
many instances they tell and how they
describe it. Because here's what's
interesting. The person who solves the
problem goes into the detail and feels
the emotion of the person that's telling
the
story only conveys it but doesn't know
the emotion that is attached to solving
it. Mhm. So when you when that little
child finally figures out how to, you
know, you give them a trick lock where
wood things have to go this way or this
way and then the little thing opens.
When they come back and tell you that,
you see the gravitydefying behavior, the
arching of the eyebrows, the bright eyes
and saying, "I solved it. I solved it. I
got in there." Yeah. Right. The problem
the person that's just telling you this
story doesn't know the emotion that goes
with it. The other thing that you know I
I I look for is and they may be nervous
or whatever is how good are are they at
observing. This is the one question that
um has uh actually saved a lot of
companies when I say make sure that from
now on you ask how good are you
observing and they'll say well observing
what everything that matters people
events
opportunities right if you come to me
and say well I can code this okay that's
great but in the position that you're
going to be in you're going be managing
people. How good are you at observing
people? The great thing about companies
that that seek this is all right. So
when you go and you business your you go
see your
subsidiary, what are you what are you
looking for? What are you observing?
Well, when I look at the
books, how about the attitude of the
people? Are people content? Are they
happy? Or do they all look like they're
constipated? I mean, I've been into
companies that the minute I walk in, I
go, "Oh, geez, you got management
problems here." And the guy goes, "Who
did somebody tell you?" I I I said,
"Well, you know, I'd have to be
clinically stupid not to recognize that
all these people are walking around with
their heads hung low, that they make no
eye contact, nobody they pass each other
in the subway and they don't talk to
each other. You got management issues
here." M
and you know and it's like they hired
for this
skill but is that really what you need
when you actually need somebody that is
a great observer? What about confidence?
Is this something that you're born with
or do you think confidence can be
trained into somebody?
I think confidence can absolutely be
trained. coming from Cuba where we lost
everything arriving as a refugee having
nothing and then all of a sudden uh the
FBI asked me to become I mean I didn't
apply to the FBI the FBI actually came
to me and asked me to apply and then all
of a sudden I said are are you guys
serious is like I'm 23 years old you
know I'm barely learning how to
shave and with no confidence whatsoever
and they teach you to be
confident. You can teach confidence. And
what I tell people is the easiest way to
learn confidence is to be confident
about one
thing. I don't care if it's you stack
papers better than anybody else.
I don't care if it's the way you make
your your bed, any small
thing. Show me that you're confident.
Show me that that's better than anybody
else's. And the minute you can be
confident about one thing, now you can
be confident about two things and then
you can be confident about three things.
this nonsense that I often see people
say, "Well, just come in and be
confident." Uh, I think that's nonsense.
I think you have to learn and your your
physiology has to learn to be confident
about one thing. You know, with me, I
was confident in uh playing football.
Okay? I was fast. I could do certain
things. I was confident about that. I I
knew that in basketball I could shoot a
three-pointer. Okay, confident about
that, but not confident about a a a host
of other things. To be in a room full of
executives, I remember when I had no
confidence. So, how do I work on that?
You you cannot unless you're a
worldclass actor, you cannot walk into a
place and all of a sudden pretend you're
you're confident. I tell people learn to
be confident about one thing. And
sometimes it's
knowledge. I always there is no meeting
I go into that I am not well read on
that subject. If you want to achieve
confidence, know everything that you can
about a particular subject. And that
gives you so much great confidence. And
I've seen young people come right out of
college and they're sitting there, you
know, they're they're they're elbows are
in. They're they're almost mousy
looking. They're nervous. They're
looking about constantly. They don't
know where to look. And you know, and I
and I tell them, "Know your subject.
Know your subject." because the minute
they begin to talk about that they begin
to flower and and and change. So So it's
competence in a particular area or
vertical creates confidence which then
kind of permeates.
Yes. And and that's what the milit in
the you know the military you know like
the British military that's what they
they take young people 17 18 19 years
old and they say you know we're going to
change you into a warrior. Well, how's
that? By running, by by getting you to
climb up that rope, by doing any number
of things where you come can come away
and feel uh that confidence. You talked
in a video that I watched um for Wired
about a variety of different ways we can
exhibit and be more confidence and show
confidence. One of them is really
looking at the leaders in your life who
are confident and trying to sort of
replicate some of those confident
behaviors, right? Um the other one was
about your voice. Use a deeper voice and
do not rise at the end of the sentence
as if it's a question. Right? So let me
talk about those. Don't try to reinvent
what's
successful. A confident person doesn't
have to talk fast and doesn't talk high.
Right? I remember the first arrest I
made and I said, "Stop. This is the
FBI." My voice was Nobody was gonna
stop. Nobody. Nobody. And the guys that
were with me said, "Joe, you got to work
on your voice. You have to have a
command voice." Well, a command voice is
down. Like, like, stop right there. I
I'll give you an example. You talk to
most executives and you say, "Um, no,
that's not acceptable. It's too
high." No is always said down. No. Are
we are we gonna
No, that sounds like a complete
sentence.
Do you get you you get them to practice
saying no? Absolutely. I I did it at you
know for 10 years every every February
the guy that uh Brian Hall who
encouraged me to write my one of my
books called Louderder Than Words
invited me to go to Harvard and I I'll
never forget I had a a complete Harvard
class. I think there were 76 students
and and I had them all saying the word
no
no going going lower. He had stepped out
of the room for to to take a call. When
he came back he he he thought I had a
cult going. I said no Brian I just I'm
teaching them the right way because
these are going to be future executives
that you don't say no no no no.
Now, that sounds like a complete
sentence. No, no, that's not how it's
gonna work. And and it's always uh
lower. So, we work on the words. More
importantly,
uh we work on the on the gestures, how
much territory you occupy because the
territory that you occupy, if you're
here sort of like shriveled and tight,
you're shriveled. Uh you want to you
don't want to be excessive. You don't
want to look like a clown, but you you
you want to have the the space that
you're entitled to. And then I think
it's very important to learn to speak in
cadence. When you speak in cadence, and
I do it, is people listen. They have
time to process what you're saying, but
they can also attach the emotion that
goes with it. Who spoke in cadence?
Churchill. Uh Martin Luther King, I have
a dream that one day one day
this nation will rise
up and live out the true meaning of its
creed. We hold these truths to be
self-evident that all men are created
equal.
Powerful. Imagine if he stood up there
say I have one dream that one day might
it's like who would listen to that? But
he was a preacher and he knew how to
command an audience. And when Churchill
said, "We will fight them in the air. We
will fight on the beaches. We shall
fight on the landing grounds. We shall
fight in the fields and in the streets.
We shall fight in the hills. We shall
never surrender."
The cadence is uh not just seductive, it
is powerful. And a lot of executives
don't know how to use it. They just I I
I've been to presentations
where people just let go. They're not
even listening to what's being said. And
yet somebody begins to talk to them in
cadence and says, "This is our
offer. It is not
final, but for the moment, it is our
best
offer." Now you're paying attention.
you're paying attention not just to what
I said but the emotion behind it. That's
a lot better to say, well, this is not
our last offer, but uh you know,
we there's a real authority when you
slow things down just that little bit
and provide the gaps, which goes back to
what I said, who controls time controls.
You're establishing control over the
theater of the
negotiations. They don't teach that.
Your hand gestures as well. You've got
very complimentary hand gestures to what
you're saying. Even as you're speaking
to me, you just went who controls time
controls controls and and so it's I'm
wondering how I and my fingers are
spread out establishing how much we care
about something. When we fear, our
fingers come together. And when we fear
a lot, our thumbs tuck in. I' I've seen
people in negotiations give up a lot of
information because all of a sudden they
they tuck their thumbs in. I Okay,
they're scared because dogs tuck their
ears in, humans tuck their the hands, no
matter how dark you are, your hands, the
palm of the hands are very
visible. that evolved with us because
they're
expressive. So even in low light, we can
use our hands to
communicate. The more confident we are,
the further our fingers are. I care.
Imagine if I said I care about you
versus I care about you. There's a big
difference. So in the first example, you
kind of had your fingers together. In
the second, you spread them out.
this, I care about
this. And so they potentiate the
message. Um, and the human brain evolved
also to look for the hands because the
hands number one can be used as a
weapon, but number two, they are also
emblematic of the emotions that um that
we feel and eye contact. Yes, lots been
said about eye contact and the
importance of it. What should I
understand about eye contact confidence?
Eye contact in some ways is uh I mean we
could spend about 40 minutes on it
because and I as a teacher I can tell
you because you want to have good eye
contact. For instance, if you're dealing
with a woman, you don't want it to go,
you know, normal eye contact is here.
You don't want it going down to here to
the breasts. Okay? So, you want to stay
looking at the face, right? So you want
to keep it uh in in the face, but you
also don't want to intimidate unless you
want to intimidate. Um so you have to uh
employ things like eye gaze behavior.
You have to employ things such as
looking away. Now you and I both look
away as we're thinking about examples
and and and different things. You can
use eye contact for uh
emphasizing. Look how often we use eye
contact or our eyes to communicate
opinions. Maybe with your partner, you
said, "What do you think?" And and
immediately they'll look he or she may
may look at your partner, not yours
specifically, but somebody you live with
and they go, "No." Right? So with our
eyes, with our eyes, we often give our
opinions. So in negotiations, it's uh
it's an important area. One of the
things I think a lot about is about
rapport building very very quickly. You
know, someone that does this podcast a
lot. I sometimes I overthink it a little
bit, especially when I'm meeting people
like you because I'm like, "Oh my god,
this guy's going to be reading
everything about me and d So, so
sometimes I'm like I think I overthink
it when I meet someone like you, a body
language expert, someone who's good at
behavioral science." Um, I want to talk
about rapport building. We actually
videoed our interaction today. So when
when I walked in Yeah. and I've got the
video here. Let me have a look at this.
See if there's We'll put it on the
screen for anyone that's watching. But I
just want you to analyze my interaction
with you when I met you and tell me how
it could have been better. All right.
Hello. So first of all, you were waiting
for me with arms of Kimbo, which is I'm
in charge. I'm the big guy. And so your
arms were here. Yeah, I got it. Okay.
Okay. But you know, I actually do
remember that. I remember thinking, get
your hands off your hips. No,
no, no. But but but it's fine. This is
your domain. I expect this from you in
your domain. But one of the things you
immediately did was you immediately went
around the table and you went forward to
shake my hand. Right? So one of the
things that I say is how much people
matter to us is determined by how fast
we act. Okay. So the fact that you
actually went from there to here and you
did it immediately, it demonstrates that
you care. As early as 11 months, a baby
will
recognize individuals or even inanimate
objects that care just based on how
quickly they move towards them or
towards them to do something for them.
Okay? It's called a pro-social act. and
babies as young as 11 months recognize
that. So, this is something that uh I it
doesn't surprise me because you've been
successful. You know, the the success is
for me is measured on how well people uh
get along with others.
Thank you for the work. Appreciate you.
Thank you. You're very very smart. You
look like someone who uh who worked in
the FBI. I uh it's the FBI uniform. This
is the Well, uh will I be miked or is it
just this? Just that one. Just Just that
one. Perfect. Okay. You said something
charming about how I I I was dressed,
which I uh appreciated. Uh this is
always a good reminder to me of how old
I look now. And uh and uh the only note
that I would I would add is I would have
remained standing a little longer. Ah
okay. and then made sure that you know
as I'm sitting then you sit at the same
time. Okay. So invite you to sit and sit
with you at at the same at the same time
rather than allow me to all now if you
can see in that instance I'm actually
still over you while you're already uh
seated that is in
negotiations that would be as we say
contraindicated.
What does that mean? It is. It's a no
no. It's a big word. It's a big word for
Steve. Don't do that. Okay. What about
taking notes? This is something that
I've started doing actually in the last
six months when I'm in meetings in my
companies in the UK. Um is I have an
iPad now and when someone's speaking it
actually helps me because of the way
that I think and process and learn and
it helps me also to not be listening to
speak i.e. if they say something and I
immediately have an idea that I'm
worried I'm going to lose instead of,
you know, that kind of behavior, I can
write down what I'm about to say and it
gives me more time to listen. But but
one of the things I noticed in your work
is you say that in terms of showing
someone you care, taking notes is a
really effective way to do that. Well,
what I what I would say to you is what I
would tell the therapists, one of the
biggest mistakes therapists have started
making is they sit there and because a
lot of them are earning a lot less money
and they don't have a secretarial pool
like they used to, they now
type their
observations as they're talking to their
client. I think that's a big mistake.
And from my the studies that my company
did in surveying uh not the therapists
but their clients, the ones that were
willing to talk. It's terrible. What I
tried to emphasize is
um have material in front of
you and if there's a particular note uh
write a little something or if you have
somebody with you that's uh going to be
the the notetaker.
I don't want to miss anything. If you're
writing, you're not observing. And
observing is actually more important
than writing. Now, if you started
talking and mentioned, if you had
mentioned the uh supernal notch, I I
might have, okay, is that super or supra
sternal notch? Okay, that's a worthy
note. And then I come back and revisit.
But if I'm writing all the time, I you
know, I I have young people tell me,
"Well, you're just an old-timer. This is
how we've grown up." I can tell you that
from an evolutionary standpoint, we
cannot outdo our DNA. We just cannot
simply, for instance, schools come in
and say, you know, well, you can't hug
the students anymore. Okay?
don't
expect you know why you know why do we
have depressed students why do we I
there's any number of things but I can
tell you this we evolved to hug to touch
to greet each other you know your best
mate all that stuff when we used to
wrestle with our buddies right uh that
that play that play wrestling all that
is is is covert
touching it's because our species needs
it. Humans need to touch. There are
certain things that humans need and that
one of them is this facial interactions.
When you're focused on writing, you're
actually taking away from that. How do
you think about handshakes then? Because
handshakes are how we kind of touch
strangers in a socially acceptable way.
Is there a good way to handshake? There
is. Um and and there's bad ones. So I
always say when you shake hands the
fingers are down right a lot of people
put their finger up and so when they
shake hand let's see if we can reach
each other and so when they go like this
now you have their finger in this er
this is an erogenous area of your body
this is what you kiss
yeah well the the the inside of the
wrist uh is an erogenous area and so now
you have this man's finger here and it's
and it's just weird. So the fingers are
low and the pressure is applied equally.
So you don't try to Donald Trump hit the
squeeze. Yeah. Don't don't don't do a
Donald Trump handshake or don't don't
jerk the hand. Don't squeeze it too
tight. Don't play jujitsu. Uh people my
age have arthritis. Uh I'm never
impressed. I've had, you know, men come
in and they're big and burly and they
squeeze my hand and it's like, are you
serious? What about the cupping where
they they cup with so cupping of the
hand is okay with really people you know
but uh most people don't like to have
their hands engulfed if you want to
touch somebody else's hand so you shake
the hand and then you touch the upper
arm and all of that for anybody that
likes matcha for anybody that likes
lattes one of my companies has just
launched canned matcha lattes and I was
speaking with the founder Marissa and
she said that creating this product has
been no easy feat. They tried launching
in 2021, but as is often the case in
business, the development process turned
out to be extremely complex. So, they've
spent the last 4 years testing and
refining every single detail to create
this, which is a perfect Ted matcha
vanilla latte and a perfect Ted matcha
strawberry latte. So, what we have here
in these cans is barista quality matcha
straight from the can and it tastes like
it's just been made from your favorite
cafe. naturally sweet and naturally
creamy in a can. And the reason why I've
invested in this company and I drink
matcha is because matcha as an energy
source gives me lasting energy without
the big crashes that I get from other
products. Grab their ready to drink
canned matcha lattes at Waitros,
Tesco's, and Holland and Barrett and
Perfect.com where you can use code
Steven40 for 40% off your first order.
I've got another video for you here. So,
he starts out with an arm down, but he's
he's touching his neck, covering his
neck. He's crimping the left side of his
face, and he's massaging his forehead
and his neck. So, I mean, we look at and
we say, "Okay, these are all emblematic
of psychological discomfort." Now, why
that is, uh, we see his blink or eyelid
flutter, uh, he's touching his face. Why
is that? I I don't know. It's not now
there's a cathartic exhale. Looks like
he's reading one of my books. What I
would tell you is is these are all the
behaviors you wouldn't want from a
leader. You would certainly you see that
from a follower but not a leader. You'll
never see a general do any of that.
Certainly not in the US Army or the the
uh the British army. All the behaviors
that he's doing which are pacifyings or
indicators of uh some sort of
psychological discomfort are also all
the behaviors that we equate with lack
of confidence.
Leaders are often exceptional and you
say that exceptional individuals are
made not born and that's a good thing
because that puts this level of
excellence within reach of you and me
and you've identified several traits
that make someone an exceptional person.
Yeah. Um one of those is
selfmastery. self-mastery whether it was
Alexander the Great who sought the the
learnings of let's see Socrates taught
Plato who taught Aristotle who Alexander
so Aristotle taught Alexander the great
and he pursued the knowledge Thomas
Edison one of the greatest inventors in
America 1300
patents left school at age six sought
the knowledge I mean as humble as I came
from we were so poor I literally had to
go to garbage cans to steal books and
magazines to to to learn. You can create
your own apprenticeship program and you
can learn to master a skill or a
knowledge or an athletic move whatever.
Someone who is
selfmastered what have they
accomplished?
They have accomplished something that
nobody can take from them.
Nobody can take that from me. What is
it? All that knowledge, all that skill,
all that
experience, nobody can can take from me.
Why is the word self in there?
Selfmastery
because so much of it nobody, you know,
we were talking earlier and I said I I
try to read two books a week so that way
I can have read about a thousand books
every decade. Nobody's telling me to do
that. And so it's self uh why because I
wanted to know because you know why did
why did uh Leonardo da Vinci want to
know the eddies water eddies in the
water or the length of a woodpecker's
tongue? Who cares? It doesn't matter. It
was
self-imposed. And we we in this world
are the beneficiaries of Leonardo de
Vishi's interest in water eddies which
then helped him to draw hair of the Mona
Lisa were the beneficiaries of that. I
think
selfmastery is more important than uh I
think what a university can teach you.
It can a university can teach you how to
think but it doesn't teach you mastery.
So is this because I'm I'm hearing like
obviously learning and the pursuit of
knowledge and then there's this other
part of selfmastery which feels like
self-awareness being aware of oneself
like well I think you're an example of
of of selfmastery there it's the only
word around the in the universe of
languages that
encapsulates being able to take what is
available
and making it a part of your life. And
so whether it was my grandmother
teaching me how to talk to people or my
mother or my father, my mother showing
me how to actually shake hands, my
sister showing me how to how to dance.
This is all part of selfmastery. Now, I
could have rejected all of that, and a
lot of people do. A lot of people reject
science or reject, oh, I I don't want to
learn how to dance. I don't want to
learn to do that. Okay, that's your
option. But there's there's an exquisite
elegance in being able to look at the
world around you and learn from it,
which you have done and say, I'm going
to put that to work. Why should I re
reinvent what other people have
experienced? I'm going to adopt that
which I like and prefer and then I'm
going to put it uh to good use. The
second one is observation which I think
we've talked about
observation you know I the the great
example is uh a parent who can observe
uh the the immediate needs of children
and and and so forth and I see people
now that they're so I was at the airport
yesterday coming here and there was a
family that the whole time they were
waiting not once talked to each other
nor were they aware of what the others
were doing. I find that difficult
because when my daughter was growing up,
I never took my eyes off of her. I see
people on their devices as this whole
family
was and they're missing out on uh a lot
of things, a lot of in information. The
great inventions are made through
observation. The the Velcro, do you know
the story of Velcro? No. In the middle
of World War II, a Swiss guy goes up in
the mountains and comes back hiking,
right? And he looks at his socks and he
says, "Man, these chiggers, these little
uh Is it a plant?" Yeah, it's just the
little seedlings that they give off that
stick to things. We here in America, we
call them
stickers. There's all sorts of names.
And he looks at it under a microscope
and he notices that they they don't just
stick out, they're actually curved. and
in in curving they get stuck on
everything. So he
says I'll just invent this. Now what's
interesting we talk about observation is
he had seen
this one time. How many millions of
people had seen it but it's the
observer that can can capitalize on it.
And that's why I tell executives when
you hire hire good observers because
they're going to save you. They're the
guy ones that are going to say, "Hey,
I'm seeing some trends here that are
bad." So, observation is is key. And
then we transition right into the next
one is most people think communication
is just about words
and communication is principally most
effectively and most influential a
non-verbal across every culture.
and the the misconception that words
triumph over uh nonverbals. Go to a
funeral. Go to a funeral and see how
word how well words work versus putting
your arm around somebody and let them
sob on your shoulder. It's the primary
means by which we communicate. It's the
primary means by which we show we care
and it's the primary means by which we
show empathy.
The fourth one is action. And it for me
it really links to both the second point
which was observation but also to your
story about velcro because there must
have been many people that thought oh my
god that thing's sticking to me and they
did nothing. Maybe even they maybe even
some people who thought oh that could be
useful but then the the hard part often
is doing something about it's the action
is doing is doing something as I talk in
the book be exceptional do something
that is pro-social or beneficial but
don't
wait right the the the the worst thing
we can do if you want to let people know
that you don't care take your time and
this happens all the time you you go to
a counter you walk up to a counter
and say, "Hey, you know, I' I'd love
some help with this. I, you know," and
then they just, "Well, I don't know. Um,
let me check in the back." And they take
their time walking to the back. And then
they take time walking back. You might
as well be shouting, "I don't care."
What I tell managers is that's your
responsibility. Why did you hire someone
who can't move at the speed of light?
Because movement is equated with caring.
So, if that's their attitude, you might
as well have a sign that says, "I don't
care." Now, you could say, "Well, you
know, maybe they have a mobility
problem." Fine. Fronted. I'd say, "You
know what? It's going to take me a
minute because I just had my hip
replaced, but I'm going to address it
right now.
We're we we can forgive
but when we when we don't show we care
by
action that is so immediate. And the
fifth one is psychological comfort. And
you write in the book that this is the
most powerful strength humans possess.
Absolutely. What's interesting about
humans in the years that I've studied
them is that humans don't seek
perfection.
the the a baby doesn't care if it's
sucking its own thumb or the or the the
twin sister's thumb. They
interchangeable is like humans don't
seek perfection. What we seek is
psychological comfort and whoever
provides that is the soonest winner. It
is as simple as that. if you can. Um,
you're too young, but I remember when
computers came out and they were in ugly
boxes and they were in ugly stores and
they were behind the counter and they
were ugly. Steve Jobs comes around and
says, "No, we're going to put them on
these lab tables like we have and we're
going to make them accessible." So this
mysterious device that is such a ugly
word that you forget that people hated
computers so much they used to come in
at night and cut the cords. That's how
scared people were of of of computing.
And he went from 4% shares of the
computer market to whatever it is now 67
or what whatever the number is. Why?
Psychological comfort.
And I tell this to businessmen. When
you're negotiating, what you're
negotiating for is can you create enough
psychological
comfort that the other person can live
with
that so that I can feel okay maybe I
didn't get everything I wanted but for
this period in time I can live with that
psychological comfort. I can go back to
the board and report that this was the
best that I can do and so forth. Aim for
psychological comfort. And how does one
go about creating psychological comfort
in in any context?
You started it today. You welcome me in
and then you said, "What would you like
to drink? Would you like some water?
Would you like some tea? Would you like
some coffee?"
That begins the process of psychological
comfort. We're in a quiet
environment. Less noise, more
psychological comfort, less lighting. It
doesn't hurt the eyes. Anything that
starts at a
biological,
physical, physiological, and then
cognitive level. So, psychological
comfort, we're negotiating. So, you want
to offer 3,000. I think I'm worth 6,000.
So, how do we achieve that? Well, I'm
going to let you tell me your side of
why
you you can only provide 3,000 and I'm
going to provide you my side. Okay? The
fact that we actually get to tell our
story begins the process of
psychological comfort. Now, in the end,
I may have to abide by that because
there's only so much money
And if it's not in the budget, it's not
in the budget. But there may be some
things that you can add to say, look,
this is all we have at this time, but
we're going to re-evaluate this in three
months. And if we can then, depending on
earnings, get you another $500 a month,
we will do it. Then we do it
incrementally, but always thinking about
what provides psychological comfort.
being harsh, being indignant, not being
attentive to needs, wants, desires, and
even preferences create psychological
discomfort. In um in 2009, you wrote a
book called Narcissists Among Us. Yes.
And earlier on you said that roughly 2%
of people are narcissists, but then 25%
of CEOs are 22% as high as 22% of CEOs
have narcissistic traits. Yes. Okay. And
if someone's dealing with a narcissist,
what do they have
to do in order to manage that situation?
Because according to those numbers,
roughly like 98% of people um aren't
narcissists, but probably will deal with
them in their lifetime. And then you
know a significant amount of people work
with them. Yeah. Even though they
account for 2% of the population,
we will work with or for somebody like
that. So what we have to keep in mind,
well, what do we mean by narcissist?
We're not talking about the person that
looks in the mirror and likes to uh
splash on cologne and comb their hair.
This is a person that overvalues
themselves but has to devalue others.
This is the person who um only thinks
about themselves and doesn't care of
what uh suffering or what's going on
through your life. Wants you to be loyal
but is not loyal to you. Is
disinterested in your personal affairs
but wants you to be interested in
theirs. There is your malignant
narcissist. Oh, and by the way, they
inherently tell lies, but expect you to
tell the the truth to them. Now, the
effect is, well, if if they're only 2%
of the population, but we see them in a
lot of corporations, we're going to work
for them, then, you know, how do we get
along? Or first is recognizing that
they're going to devalue us. Now,
sometimes they devour you by not
inviting you to meetings or sharing
information, but many times it's by the
way they treat you, yelling at you, uh,
being disparaging. I mean, I have some
things that are horrific. So, what do we
do when we have people like that? Number
one is recognize what you're dealing
with. And that's why I wrote be the um
dangerous personalities because um I
have uh these robust checklists in there
which have been tested many times. So
you can see oh wow out of 125 things
this person is has 75 of these
traits you've you've got a problem. But
now here's the thing. When we live with
somebody like this, let's say you you
you know they can be very charming, but
then they turn on you and they become
who they really are. Um then how do you
how do you deal with that? What I can
tell you is that the arc of the
trajectory does not favor you. That
these individuals are so costic. They're
so toxic that eventually uh they will
victimize you physically, mentally,
emotionally,
uh physiologically or financially.
You'll be victimized. The question then
is, and I tell this to a lot of
executives who work for these
individuals who they're bullied and this
stuff is, how long are you willing to
tolerate it? If you can set a number and
say 6 months or a year, okay, but then
do something because you will pay a
price. You know, there's a great book
called the the the body keeps the score.
The body will definitely keeps the
score. you will pay a price for being in
the proximity of a toxic individual. And
if you become that person's chew toy,
you will suffer uh
immensely. Um and so I say, you know,
there's no pill to cure them. There is
nothing you can do to make them like
you. They expect no loyalty. Try to get
out as soon as you can. And that's the
only advice that uh you know obviously
I'm not a clinician u but I think most
clinicians if they're honest will say
you got to get out of there. It's this
is not tolerable. So don't try and win
in any respect. Don't try and I don't
think you can win. First of all these
individuals are severely flawed of
character. They have no introspection.
They see themselves as perfect. They
don't see any imperfection in in in
themselves. And so because they're
flawed of character, you cannot expect
normal behaviors uh from them. And so
why expose yourself to them? Um they're
they will be like that all their lives.
There's a particular chapter where you
say um one is bad, two is terrible,
three is lethal.
Oh, you know, people I get this question
all the time. Well, can you have
multiple traits? Yes, you can have you
can be pathologically narcissistic. So
you overvalue yourself and you can also
have traits of the paranoid
personality where that um you are very
rigid in your thinking and you're always
suspicious of everybody's intentions. In
history you look at Hitler. Hitler was
pathologically he was a malignant
narcissist. He was clinically paranoid.
Who did he fear? Uh uh minorities, the
the the Roma, the what was then called
the gypsies, and of course uh the Jewish
people. That's that is clinical
paranoia. And he was a psychopath. Okay,
let's just lay that out there. Uh what
is psychopathy? Psychopathy is where you
have no remorse, no empathy, no
conscience. You can do whatever you want
and you sleep well at night there.
That's your Robert Hair the researcher
is the best one that defines
psychopathy. Hitler had it all. There's
a thin line probably there between like
narcissism and self-belief because when
you're describing narcissism, you're
talking about like overimportance, like
really believing one's important. And it
sounds somewhat like someone who is
extremely self-believing.
Well, narcissism, by the way,
narcissism, which has been studied since
the 1950s, we now have a narcissistic
society like we we never did before. We
see it in the way we talk about
ourselves more than anything. We get on
Tik Tok and other forms and we espouse
all sorts of things. And so, we're way
more narcissistic now than in the 1950s.
They look at even the words we use. Now,
we use the word me and I more than we
did in the 1950s. We used to say we and
ours. Now we say me and I. And the true
narcissist
um has a belief system that is so
corrupt. Um they're truly flawed of
character and they not only have the
traits of
narcissism, but they truly believe how
they see themselves as infallible as I
only have the answers. I'm the person
that can make us great again. And I know
what you're gonna ask me next. No, I'm
not gonna ask you that. Thank you. Thank
you. But if the traits fit, then you
know what I tell people is as you
whether you're going into an
organization or if you're looking at
who's leading your country, ask
yourself, do they have these traits? And
if they have the the the traits, then
it's not a difficult equation.
psychology is in especially when it
comes to people flawed of character is
not that difficult is do I want to work
for somebody that values me or someone
that devalues others and you start with
that in all these decades of you doing
all these incredible things hunting
terrorist spies aerial surveillance
working in partnership with the SAS um
interviewing people chasing down
terrorists how has it changed you as a
human being how has it shifted your
perception of human behavior and what it
is to be a human and meaning and all of
these bigger questions of life. I've
never been asked that question. So,
thank you for asking a most profound
question. I guess the best answer is
that I learned a peace meal and I'm glad
I learned peace meal. And by that I mean
that my first homicide was just a
regular homicide that I responded to. My
first suicide was which was a police
officer was uh you know it was in
increments. I think if I had been
presented with everything that I had
been presented with all at once I think
I would have had a mental breakdown. I'm
glad that it was episodic that I was
able to learn from each. And what I have
learned is number
one that who were most of the people
that I talked to, the majority were
witnesses or
victims. And these were nice people.
They were kind people. Some of the
nicest people were these poor farmers
out in Arizona. They grow cotton. They
they don't earn very much. They're good
people. you you learn that everything
you're doing in law enforcement is
really for
them. Um you know later on when I got
into counter espionage and now you're
dealing with nation states and the
equities of different nations and yeah
each country has their own priorities
but you realize that when you're dealing
with uh extremists and they have their
own belief system and there's nothing
really you can do to change them. But we
also have our belief systems. And you
have to realize,
okay, I can't fix all the problems. As a
law enforcement agent, I can only attend
to that which I can help or resolve or
so forth. I couldn't find all the
suspects that either raped or killed or
bombed. I was at Brigham Y Young
University when she was uh one a girl
was uh abducted by uh a serial
killer and to this day I am in pain that
I was on duty that night when she was
abducted. I still feel
it. And these things they weigh on you.
But I'm
also very h you know when I get with
students I mentor people. I mentor a lot
of executives but I also mentor young
people who are
curious and I see the eagerness in which
they pursue life and knowledge and that
gives me great hope. Why are you still
in pain about being on duty that night?
Because you can't get it out of you. I
can't get the smell
of. Sometimes you go to a crime scene
and the smell is so bad that you can't
wash the smell away. You have to burn
your clothes. Forensic examiners know
this.
There's just some things that you can,
you know, the the first person I saw uh
killed was in
Kuwa and you just can't
there's, you know, biologically you have
the hippoampi. You have two of them and
that retains everything negative you
ever experience. That's why you can't
take a pill for post-traumatic stress
because the hippoampi makes sure that
the first time you burn yourself
touching that stove doesn't occur again.
So all things negative are retained
sometimes forever but usually around a
decade. But I'm also enlightened by the
fact that people still pursue good
things. You know, I hear from people who
work with dogs or who work with the
handicapped with no
expectation of of any reward. And I
think most people have a a good heart, a
kind heart. And so I tried to focus on
those people that I met which gave me
the examples for
uh be exceptional. That woman in Brazil
who at the age of six was became blind.
She went on to have 12 children. She had
more, but only 12 survived. And who
could still do needle work blind by
feeling. I will never forget that
experience either. To sit in her
presence
was a a a bestowed pleasure upon me. to
understand a woman who has who could
sense people moving in and around her
just by how the hairs on her hand moved
as they interacted with with this with
the the space around her. It it was a
great experience. So, what day of your
career are you most proud of or were you
most happy?
Oh, wow.
Well, I was uh I'll tell you, I was I
was really happy when I graduated from
the FBI
Academy. Imagine at any time at any one
time there's
27,000 applicants to the FBI and they
will only accept uh 220 maybe or so a
year. Um so I was I was elated. I was
also
uh very happy the day I
uh left the FBI because at that point I
had done it all and I wanted to do other
things. I wanted to write uh which is
very difficult to do when you're in the
bureau and I wanted to uh continue
teaching. Yeah. So I think those two
events were uh when it comes to career
was uh good times in my life. Joe, my
audience are very much people that want
to learn um that love stories that want
to change their life, improve their life
so that they can achieve the objectives
they have. So you've written a lot of
books. I think it's 15 in total. Well,
14 published uh the 15th comes out next
year. Y. So my my last question then is
of everything in the 14 pending 15 books
that you've written and everything
you've learned, what is the most
important thing that I didn't ask you
about that would be helpful to somebody
who's looking to improve their life,
their communication skills, their body
language to be more effective in the
pursuit of their goals that I should
have asked you about?
Well, I uh I hate to ruin this for you,
but I think you asked really in however
many minutes or hours we've been doing
this uh a lot of great questions. And I
think in your questions, the the essence
is what is the importance of connecting?
You know, your audience is are all in
the people business. I mean unless
they're working as a they write code but
even they we're all in the people
business and the the what your questions
really circled around is what's the
importance of connecting what's the
importance of connecting properly and
then how do we make maintain those
connections and we we've talked about
this the importance of nonverbals to
communicate I trust you I value you I
care about you and all that, but then
creating that psychological comfort that
allows us to then have this long time
together that relationships are uh are
are invaluable. I think that's the
greatest lesson. Every time I go
anywhere, I say we are in the people
business. And I think you are exemplary
um in demonstrating what what you can
achieve if only you have
that. That's a great
compliment. Thank you so much. We have a
closing tradition where the last guest
leaves a question for the next guest not
knowing who they're leaving it for. And
the question that's been left for you is
H
interesting. What do people say that
they like about
you? I think that one is easy. And it's
easy because I hear it so often and they
say, "You're so approachable."
I think they see pictures of me, you
know, where I'm looking sternly or they
think an FBI agent and and wherever I go
around the world, they say, "Well, you
look so average. You look approachable."
And I've always tried to make myself
approachable. Um whether you're a a
student, whether you are the security
guard or whatever, I am always
accessible. I'm always approachable and
uh and I treat everybody the same. Joe,
thank you. Um it's a really interesting
time that we're living in. We talked
about it a bit before we started
rolling. Um we're more digital than ever
before. We're living behind screens and
connection is somewhat of a lost art.
And that's why people are so in
so
misunderstood and how to communicate how
they truly feel because it's not
something that now comes naturally to
this digital from birth generation.
Right. And that's something that I think
your work does so profoundly. It kind of
brings us back to what it is to be
human. That that throughine of
anthropology and understanding our
evolution and where it all came from as
well is the reinforcer of everything
that you say. And um it's incredibly
important and it's and so incredibly
resonant. I've seen it across the videos
that you've you've been in and the
interviews that you've done. They're
just so unbelievably resonant. And
that's because people are so thirsty for
this information. And many of the
problems I think we often find in our
lives stem from um being ineffective at
communicating to someone else how we
feel and what we truly think. Maybe
because we haven't learned, but also
maybe we're learning another behavior
and maybe we're becoming more
individualistic and more withdrawn and
more um trapped behind screens. So, I
really applaud you for the work that
you're doing and I highly recommend
people go and read these books. There's
a lot of them, but um I'm going to link
them all below and with a little
synopsis so you can decide which one
best suits you. I read a few of them.
One of my favorites is the Be
Exceptional One. It's so accessible, but
they're all very good at different
things depending on what it is you're
looking for in your life. whether it's
body language, whether you just you're
the type of person that wants to hear
more about um hunting terrorists or
understanding psychopaths or um
generally more things about the FBI and
the life that you've lived. So, I'll
link them all
below. Is there anything we've missed?
Well, my wife would tell me, "Please be
nice and say that uh if they can mention
my uh I now have a YouTube channel to
address a lot of these things, just go
to Joe
Navaro.net and uh there's a link there
to my uh my YouTube channel, which you
would think I would know, but uh we'll
link it below. I don't know." But um I
want to thank you for what you do.
You're going to realize one day as I
realize that you're helping to change
lives even though that wasn't your
intention. Your intention was probably
to educate.
But 10 years on, 20 years on, or as I
recently found from 40 years on,
somebody will write to you and said
something you said or your example uh
affected me and it changed my life. And
you'll go, "Wow, I never thought about
that." And that's what you've done. And
uh you'll realize it one day.
Thank you. I mean, it's what you're
doing, too. Joe, thank you for being so
generous with your time. I really really
appreciate it. It's been an honor to
reach to to meet you and I'm excited to
finish the rest of your books and um to
explore more on your YouTube channel,
which I'll link below. You also do lots
of speaking. You work a lot with
companies and organizations and if
people want to reach you, they should go
to your website and send you an email
there. AB: Absolutely. Just just through
the website and uh we'll uh we'll attend
to it and uh I'm happy to share that
knowledge uh journey with uh whoever is
interested.
I'm going to let you in to a little bit
of a secret. You're probably going to
think me and my team are a little bit
weird, but I can still remember to this
day when Jamaima from my team posted on
Slack that she'd changed the scent in
this studio. And right after she posted
it, the entire office clapped in our
Slack channel. And this might sound
crazy, but at the Diary of SEO, this is
the type of 1% improvement we make on
our show. And that is why the show is
the way it is. By understanding the
power of compounding 1%s, you can
absolutely change your outcomes in your
life. It isn't about drastic
transformations or quick wins. It's
about the small consistent actions that
have a lasting change in your outcomes.
So two years ago, we started the process
of creating this beautiful diary. And
it's truly beautiful. Inside there's
lots of pictures, lots of inspiration
and motivation as well, some interactive
elements. And the purpose of this diary
is to help you identify, stay focused
on, develop consistency with the 1% that
will ultimately change your life. So, if
you want one for yourself or for a
friend or for a colleague or for your
team, then head to the diary.com right
now. I'll link it below. This has always
blown my mind a little bit. 53% of you
that listen to this show regularly
haven't yet subscribed to the show. So,
could I ask you for a favor? If you like
the show and you like what we do here
and you want to support us, the free
simple way that you can do just that is
by hitting the subscribe button. And my
commitment to you is if you do that,
then I'll do everything in my power, me
and my team, to make sure that this show
is better for you every single week.
We'll listen to your feedback. We'll
find the guests that you want me to
speak to and we'll continue to do what
we do. Thank you so much.
[Music]